chore(#11189): 5.2 release notes (#2222)
medic/cht-docs: content/en/releases/5_2_0.md

---
title: "5.2.0 release notes"
linkTitle: "5.2.0"
sidebar:
  exclude: true
description: 
  Released 2026-06-26
---

## Highlights

### Collapsable contact summaries

> Contact-summary cards are always fully expanded which, in cases like stock monitoring and immunizations, greatly  increases the amount of vertical scrolling needed to see the content below the card. With tihs feature, we now allow users to collapse and expand cards by tapping the header. Additionally, app developers can declare a property so cards can start collapsed or expanded as they desire. The the [issue](https://github.com/medic/cht-core/issues/10766) and the [docs](https://docs.communityhealthtoolkit.org/building/contact-summary/contact-summary-templated/#condition-cards) for more details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Previously, the content fields for [contact summary condition cards](/building/contact-summary/contact-summary-templated/#condition-cards) were always visible to the user. Now, the body of the contact summary cards can be collapsed or expanded by tapping their headers. This reduces vertical scrolling for content-heavy cards like stock monitoring and immunizations. App developers can control the default state by setting a property on the card.
```

#### Demo Video

> {{< cards >}}

Reviewer: I guess we don't need `cards` here since we only have one element?

Author: oh - I thought it did more layout for us, but testing it without, looks good! Removed in [c7bcf64](https://github.com/medic/cht-docs/pull/2222/commits/c7bcf64ec873d6c2e922f88e6f92a3830f10a379).

<video poster="/releases/videos/CHT5.2.demo.collapsable.sections.png" preload="auto" width="333" height="593" controls>
<source src="/releases/videos/CHT5.2.demo.collapsable.sections.webm" type="video/mp4">

> </video>

Reviewer: IMHO this video is a bit overkill for demonstrating the feature... 😅 Might make people think there is something more complicated going on here.  Would it be better to just have a couple screenshots (open/closed) of a production-style content summary card?

Author: I initially tried to describe it and I realized that the video really captured it so much better.  That said, maybe it's a bit much because your test video has all the different states.  How about a shorter, more direct video?  I tried this in 7618d7ae

{{< /cards >}}

> ### Custom UI Extensions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### UI Extensions
```

> For many years  the community has been asking for ways to customize the UI of the CHT.  Whether was the desire for [configurable pages](https://forum.communityhealthtoolkit.org/t/the-ui-evolution-of-the-cht/3515/8) or a hope to [re-order the tabs](https://forum.communityhealthtoolkit.org/t/is-there-a-way-of-changing-the-order-of-the-tabs-of-cht/2093), deep, fully customizable UI for the CHT has been on going request for many years.  In 5.2 this feature is finally being delivered with UI Extensions.  By leveraging [web components](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_components) the CHT now enables app developers to re-order tabs and create custom UIs which can call CHT APIs to read/create/update data for contacts, reports, etc.  See the `[docs](/building/reference/ui-extensions)` and [ticket](https://github.com/medic/cht-core/issues/102) for more info.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
App developers can now build [configurable pages](https://forum.communityhealthtoolkit.org/t/the-ui-evolution-of-the-cht/3515/8) in the CHT applicaiton! UI extensions are [web components](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_components) maintained and deployed as part of the CHT configuration code. They provide users with custom content from static reference pages to interactive mini-apps. UI extensions can read/create/update data for contacts, reports, etc via stable apis.   See the `[docs](/building/reference/ui-extensions)` for more info.
```

Author: thanks! Had to manually fix it a4cb8197 because the branches diverged when I removed wording about tabs above.

> For many years  the community has been asking for ways to customize the UI of the CHT.  Whether was the desire for [configurable pages](https://forum.communityhealthtoolkit.org/t/the-ui-evolution-of-the-cht/3515/8) or a hope to [re-order the tabs](https://forum.communityhealthtoolkit.org/t/is-there-a-way-of-changing-the-order-of-the-tabs-of-cht/2093), deep, fully customizable UI for the CHT has been on going request for many years.  In 5.2 this feature is finally being delivered with UI Extensions.  By leveraging [web components](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_components) the CHT now enables app developers to re-order tabs and create custom UIs which can call CHT APIs to read/create/update data for contacts, reports, etc.  See the `[docs](/building/reference/ui-extensions)` and [ticket](https://github.com/medic/cht-core/issues/102) for more info.

Reviewer: Regarding the tab ordering, I think this might deserve its own section.  😅  It is coming in the UI Extension PR, but it is really totally separate configuration and you do not need to use UI Extensions to be able to re-order your tabs (and have a new "default" tab).

Author: Great thinking!  Given how often and for how long it's been requested, worth it's own call out.  fixed in 97ff6e64

[//]: # (  mrjones says: appologies for the crass amount of HTML - we should likely templatize the ability )
[//]: # (  to put videos in cards if we use this going forward.)
<div class="hextra-cards hx:mt-4 hx:gap-4 hx:grid not-prose" style="--hextra-cards-grid-cols:3">
  {{< card  image="../images/5_2_0_UI_extensions.png" title="New \"Help\" tab on bottom of screen, main page shows custom UI Extension help content" >}}
  <a class="hextra-card hx:group hx:flex hx:flex-col hx:justify-start hx:overflow-hidden hx:rounded-lg hx:border hx:border-gray-200 hx:text-current hx:no-underline hx:dark:shadow-none hx:hover:shadow-gray-100 hx:dark:hover:shadow-none hx:shadow-gray-100 hx:active:shadow-sm hx:active:shadow-gray-200 hx:transition-all hx:duration-200 hx:hover:border-gray-300 hx:bg-gray-100 hx:shadow-sm hx:dark:border-neutral-700 hx:dark:bg-neutral-800 hx:dark:text-gray-50 hx:hover:shadow-lg hx:dark:hover:border-neutral-500 hx:dark:hover:bg-neutral-700">
  
  <video poster="/releases/videos/CHT5.2.demo.ui.extensions.png" preload="auto" width="100%" height="100%" controls>

>       <source src="/releases/videos/CHT5.2.demo.ui.extensions.mp4" type="video/mp4">

Reviewer: I am torn on this one.  🤔 On one hand, it is a nice POC showing the data flow, but on the other hand it almost feels too "far out" to include here with limited context... I worry that it will be more confusing than helpful to someone just trying to wrap their mind around what UI Extensions are exactly.

(On a side note, I am really pleased so see that I landed that demo in `3:50`!  😅 It does not even feel super rushed.)

Author: I'm torn too - but I think With Binod's more accessible example right next to it and the write we have - it's worth keeping.  I think seeing this totally foreign UI but then realizing you can have that on your own CHT instance is just the point: It is just. that. powerful. 

\o/

(if this doesn't stick, un-resolve this comment and we can dive back in)

  </video>

  <div class="hx:mt-auto">
    <span class="hextra-card-icon hx:flex hx:font-semibold hx:items-start hx:gap-2 hx:p-4 hx:text-gray-700 hx:hover:text-gray-900 hx:dark:text-neutral-200 hx:dark:hover:text-neutral-50">Demo Video of UI Extension featuring a fictitious chicken farm. Originally from CHT Round Up call</span>
  </div>
  </a>
</div>
<style>
/* Fixes video align with screenshot above */
a video {
  padding-top: 0;
}
</style>

### Search tasks

> During the [Smart Task Prioritization squad](https://github.com/medic/cht-roadmap/issues/191) it came up the CHWs who have a lot of tasks would benefit from being to use a free text search to quickly find tasks on their device.  As the tasks are all local, the search is instant and should greatly ease the process of scrolling over many tasks.  Check out [the ticket](https://github.com/medic/cht-core/issues/10694) for more info.

Reviewer: ```suggested
During the [Smart Task Prioritization squad](https://github.com/medic/cht-roadmap/issues/191), it became clear CHWs managing large numbers of tasks would benefit significantly from a free-text search feature to quickly locate tasks. The search works intantly and offline - eliminating the need to scroll through long lists. Check out [the ticket](https://github.com/medic/cht-core/issues/10694) for more info.
```

Author: fixed in bf1a2516

#### Demo Video

> <video poster="/releases/videos/CHT5.2.demo.task.search.png" preload="auto" width="333" height="593" controls>

Reviewer: Just so it is clear that I am not opposed to all video 😅 I wanted to say that this one is great!  Shows me exactly what I need to know and nothing else!

Author: yay!!!

	<source src="/releases/videos/CHT5.2.demo.task.search.mp4" type="video/mp4">
</video>

### Easily find failed replications 

As the CHT has grown to support larger and larger deployments, we're now seeing instances with over 20,000 active users and national deployments with over 80,000 active users spread across dozens of CHT instances.  With instances this important and this heavily utilized, it's critical to be able to trouble shoot any issues quickly.  One issue that Medic has seen cause real problems is having a user configured to syncronzie more than 10,000 documents. Not only can this cause the affected 10,000+ document users to fail to replicate, it can cause a slow down of the show CHT server. This makes the server slow for _all_ users.

> In the past we've [discussed](https://forum.communityhealthtoolkit.org/t/cpu-impacts-of-users-with-10k-documents-how-to-fix-them/5413) how to trouble shoot users with too many docs, but CHT 5.2 introduces new, easier-to-use API which will list users who have issues replicating. Now CHT administrators will much more quickly be able to fix or disable these users to ensure healthy synchronizing for all users. See issue [#11146](https://github.com/medic/cht-core/issues/11146) and [#10794](https://github.com/medic/cht-core/issues/10794) for more details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Identify users with replication failures

Large-scale CHT deployments are serving ever increasing numbers of users. With 20,000+ active users on some instances and 80,000+ users across multiple instances in national deployments, monitoring system health is critical.

Users configured to sync more than 10,000 documents can experience replication failures that impact both their own device performance _and_ the overall server response time for all users. Previously, identifying these problematic users required manual investigation and API queries. 

CHT 5.2 introduces a new API endpoint ([#11146](https://github.com/medic/cht-core/issues/11146) [#10794](https://github.com/medic/cht-core/issues/10794)) that quickly lists users who haven't successfully replicated within a configurable time interval. Administrators can now proactively identify and address users with excessive document loads, ensuring healthy synchronization for the entire deployment.

See also: [Monitoring user replication status](#monitoring-user-replication-status)
```

### Upgrade to CouchDB 3.5.2

> Partnering with powerful open source projects has many benefits.  Aside from being able to leverage a massive body of like CouchDB which is finely tuned to deftly handling two way synchronizing of JSON documents, it's also always being improved.  CHT 5.2 includes CouchDB 3.5.2 which is now up to 60% faster at Nouveau indexing, which the CHT uses for online full text searches. The upgrade conveniently [fixes an issue](https://github.com/medic/cht-core/issues/11153) as well. See [the ticket](https://github.com/medic/cht-core/issues/11080) for more details.

Reviewer: 😬 Probably not worth trying to sell the value of the CouchDB community here.  I def agree with the sentiment, but it feels like the best thing we can do for Couch at this point is to just quietly continue to pump more and more performance our of our setup.  The _less_ folks are thinking/talking about CouchDB in the context of the CHT, the better. (Because it means it is just working....)

```suggestion
The new CHT version includes CouchDB `3.5.2`, which brings a ~60% performance improvement for Nouveau indexing - the technology which powers the CHT replication algorithm and online full-text searches. This upgrade also [fixes an issue](https://github.com/medic/cht-core/issues/11153) causing search timeouts. See [the ticket](https://github.com/medic/cht-core/issues/11080) for more details.
```

- [#10846](https://github.com/medic/cht-core/issues/10846): Allow configuring phone number display format in outgoing SMS messages (strip country code)
- [#10862](https://github.com/medic/cht-core/issues/10862): Don't run database compaction on every version upgrade
- [#10987](https://github.com/medic/cht-core/issues/10987): Login password visibility icon does not update after toggling
- [#11071](https://github.com/medic/cht-core/issues/11071): Add monitoring data about users who fail to replicate
- [#4543](https://github.com/medic/cht-core/issues/4543): Marking inputs field's appearance as 'hidden' in person-create form generates empty pages
- [#7948](https://github.com/medic/cht-core/issues/7948): Improve misconfigured "registration" transition error message
- [#8226](https://github.com/medic/cht-core/issues/8226): Do not display a form page when all the contents are "hidden"
- [#8816](https://github.com/medic/cht-core/issues/8816): Fragile text search can invalidate CouchDb admins on container restart
- [#9834](https://github.com/medic/cht-core/issues/9834): Make login page responsive to LTR <-> RTL switching

> - [#9835](https://github.com/medic/cht-core/issues/9835): Add cht-datasource APIs for creation and update of contacts and reports

Reviewer: Good grief!  We are just releasing this now?!?!  😅

Author: :shrug:

- [#11118](https://github.com/medic/cht-core/issues/11118): Routing test fails for feature release branches
- [#11179](https://github.com/medic/cht-core/issues/11179): Flaky e2e test: create-user-for-contacts.create-user.wdio-spec.js
- [#11181](https://github.com/medic/cht-core/issues/11181): Release notes script failing: Cannot read properties of null
- [#11182](https://github.com/medic/cht-core/issues/11182): Loading webapp without a valid user cookie logs an error
- [#5936](https://github.com/medic/cht-core/issues/5936): Record test coverage
- [#8758](https://github.com/medic/cht-core/issues/8758): Test report creation using SMS in default config
- [#8799](https://github.com/medic/cht-core/issues/8799): Shared libs unit test failures are a chore to debug
- [#9491](https://github.com/medic/cht-core/issues/9491): e2e tests should fail gracefully if the ports are not available (or find a new port)
- [#9492](https://github.com/medic/cht-core/issues/9492): Webapp unit tests have very noisy logs
- [#9927](https://github.com/medic/cht-core/issues/9927): Targets widgets

## Contributors

Thanks to all who committed changes for this release!

> - [mrjones](https://github.com/mrjones-plip)

Reviewer: One of the perks of writing the release docs is that you can put your user right at the top of the list....   😅😅😅

Author: ahahha!  right!?!? :joy_cat: 

That said, the order I think is organic with a FIFO order.  I've left it for now, because if we alphabetize it `1yuv`  will always be first and `witash` will always be last.

  <a class="hextra-card hx:group hx:flex hx:flex-col hx:justify-start hx:overflow-hidden hx:rounded-lg hx:border hx:border-gray-200 hx:text-current hx:no-underline hx:dark:shadow-none hx:hover:shadow-gray-100 hx:dark:hover:shadow-none hx:shadow-gray-100 hx:active:shadow-sm hx:active:shadow-gray-200 hx:transition-all hx:duration-200 hx:hover:border-gray-300 hx:bg-gray-100 hx:shadow-sm hx:dark:border-neutral-700 hx:dark:bg-neutral-800 hx:dark:text-gray-50 hx:hover:shadow-lg hx:dark:hover:border-neutral-500 hx:dark:hover:bg-neutral-700">
  
  <video poster="/releases/videos/CHT5.2.demo.ui.extensions.png" preload="auto" width="100%" height="100%" controls>
      <source src="/releases/videos/CHT5.2.demo.ui.extensions.mp4" type="video/mp4">
  </video>

  <div class="hx:mt-auto">
    <span class="hextra-card-icon hx:flex hx:font-semibold hx:items-start hx:gap-2 hx:p-4 hx:text-gray-700 hx:hover:text-gray-900 hx:dark:text-neutral-200 hx:dark:hover:text-neutral-50">Demo Video of UI Extension featuring a fictitious chicken farm. Originally from CHT Round Up call</span>
  </div>
  </a>
</div>
<style>
/* Fixes video align with screenshot above */
a video {
  padding-top: 0;
}
</style>

> ### Search tasks

Reviewer 2: Can we rename this to "search field in tasks UI" ? "Search tasks" gives no indication of what this actually is?

During the [Smart Task Prioritization squad](https://github.com/medic/cht-roadmap/issues/191), it became clear CHWs managing large numbers of tasks would benefit significantly from a free-text search feature to quickly locate tasks. The search works instantly and offline - eliminating the need to scroll through long lists. Check out [the ticket](https://github.com/medic/cht-core/issues/10694) for more info.

#### Demo Video

<video poster="/releases/videos/CHT5.2.demo.task.search.png" preload="auto" width="333" height="593" controls>
	<source src="/releases/videos/CHT5.2.demo.task.search.mp4" type="video/mp4">
</video>

### Identify users with replication failures

Large-scale CHT deployments are serving ever increasing numbers of users. With 20,000+ active users on some instances and 80,000+ users across multiple instances in national deployments, monitoring system health is critical.

Users configured to sync more than 10,000 documents can experience replication failures that impact both their own device performance _and_ the overall server response time for all users. Previously, identifying these problematic users required manual investigation and API queries. 

> CHT 5.2 introduces a new API endpoint ([#11146](https://github.com/medic/cht-core/issues/11146) [#10794](https://github.com/medic/cht-core/issues/10794)) that quickly lists users who haven't successfully replicated within a configurable time interval. Administrators can now proactively identify and address users with excessive document loads, ensuring healthy synchronization for the entire deployment.

Reviewer 2: There are two endpoints here. 

Maybe reword to:
```
CHT 5.2.0 introduces two new API endpoints that quickly lists users who 
have had replication failures, or who have not successfully replicated 
within a configurable time interval. 
```
